All right. Hello everyone.
How you guys doing? Welcome to the first
ever YC paper club. This is like a very
exciting thing.
Absolutely thrilled with the response.
We had over a thousand folks that
applied to come in. It was a very hard
selection. If you guys have friends that
didn't make the cut, I'm very sorry.
We're we kind of we need to keep it to
about a hundred. Um and so we selected a
very very cool group. Um
the mission is to create this kind of
community of great founders and great
researchers and try to pull them
together. I guess just for you guys to
get a sense for how cool the people in
this room are. Um, raise your hand if
you have at least five citations,
10 citations,
a 100 citations,
a thousand citations.
Wow, this is insane. Okay, 10,000
citations. Oh my god. Okay. All right.
This is awesome. I I would go up to
300,000, but I think it's like Chris
Manning and that's about it. Um, so, uh,
raise your hand if you've raised at
least a million dollars.
Raise your hand if you've re raised at
least $5 million.
At least $10 million,
at least $50 million.
We still got one. We still got two over
here. All right. Okay. Awesome. The
hidden mission that I'll also kind of
add on this is we had uh Har and I had
um this uh awesome uh breakfast in uh
Woodside and this place is so so unique
and special and we kind of just don't
use it enough at YC. So the hidden
mission is to make Pioneer great again.
And so I went through winter 16 here. Um
it was an unbelievable time. I think 140
companies went through that batch. 10 of
15 of them are unicorns. It's an insane
number. um WPY, uh Astronis, um Deep
Graham, all these companies were in the
batch and during that time uh Sam was
still running the show and basically
sitting right there would be me,
Undercarpathy, Vaj Deremba and Greg
Brockman because they were starting this
thing called OpenAI and it was like the
very early stages and there was like not
that many AI companies. So they would
ask me and Steve from Debb like what are
you guys what are you working on? What
are the problems you're working on? and
they're looking for problems because
they didn't even know what to research.
And so it was such a such a special
time. This place is so special uh to to
me in particular uh to Har as well. And
we just it's it we don't really use it
enough. So I wanted um to kind of make
this community down here. And I also
think that 100% of the AI talent or AI
people in the Bay Area, probably about
half of them are in the city maybe is a
good number. There's anthropic, uh
there's open AI, there's cursor, there's
all this stuff in the city. Then there's
a lot that are down here that are not
making the trek up to the city to join
YC. And so he's like, "Yes,
emphatically, yes." Um, and so you have
Google DeepMind right on the corner. You
have um Tesla, you have XAI, you have
Thinking Machines, you have all these
other people in Palo Alto, you have a
lot of startups. And so uh I wanted to
kind of like solve six birds with one
stone and kind of pull together this
community down here as well. And Harj uh
uh is super excited about it as well.
And so thank you very much Har for
letting us do this. We got uh five great
papers here coming up. The first one is
Tanishk Speculative Speculative
Decoding. You want to come up?
All right.
Do you want me to pull it on? Yeah, I
got you.
Cool.
I know it uh looks like maybe I was
sloppy and I added an extra word in the
title, but uh it is intentional um and
it'll make sense in uh good time. Um my
name is Tanishk. I'm a grad student at
Stanford. Um, this is a project I worked
on with Triau and Aar May. I'm going to
be evangelizing inference for people
today. Hopefully, you'll be inference
enjoyers by the end. So, I'm not sure
how much I have to motivate inference. I
worked on training before inference. And
I sort of the sort of mental model I had
in mind for how inference works was you
know you do this beautiful craftsmanship
during the training process and you get
these like you know very intricate
weights and then you kind of just hand
it off and use them to generate tokens.
In my mind it's sort of like you have
the weights just multiply the matrices
it's why do you need a team for it? Um I
was very confused but there is in fact a
lot of subtlety involved. Um it's a lot
of fun the algorithms and systems behind
inference at scale. I'm not sure I need
to spend too long talking about why
inference is important. Um there is one
point I want to make that I don't hear
people talk about enough. So things you
may have heard are that inference costs
are high. They dominate training costs
when you're serving a model for billions
of users or you know 10 claud code power
users. That's trillions of tokens. Um,
not only are inference costs dominating
training costs, but even within
training, RL is starting to exceed the
compute requirements of pre-training.
And what is RL but a wrapper on
inference, right? So, these are two
things you've probably heard before. The
third is one I fear isn't really talked
about, but it's the reason that I
started working on inference, and I use
the phrase working on inference lightly.
This was the only inference project I've
ever done. Um, but the the reason I got
interested in making inference fast was
not because of cost or for convenience.
It was entirely because of capability.
So the claim I'm going to make and maybe
this is the one thing to take away from
the message I'm trying to send in this
talk is that inference today is seen as
a sort of like cost or convenience
lever. But uh in one two or 3 years
inference is going to be seen as a
capability. And what I mean by that is
that if you have a method, an algorithm,
a system where its performance scales
with the amount of thinking it does,
then fundamentally the speed at which
you can do inference, the tokens per
second is exactly the peak intelligence
that you can deliver.
So inference should be thought of as not
so much as a a cost or or convenience
factor, but as a capability. Um, and
that's why I got interested in it. I I
wanted to work towards the future where
we have an entire data data center of
20,000 B200s just working on the reman
hypothesis. Um okay, yes, that's the
future that uh I had in mind. Perhaps
this meme is a little outdated because
it has an A100 on it, but uh yeah. Okay.
So to motivate things, here is an
example of fast inference. So I'm going
to give you a little demo of uh three
algorithms side by side. We're going to
sample, you know, a code prompt from VLM
with just normal auto reggressive
decoding. We're going to use their
speculative decoding. And then I'm going
to put next to it the sort of janky
handrolled inference engine I wrote over
a summer for this project. Um, whose
main strength is just that it implements
a new algorithm and so you can see them
side by side. SSDs on the right and you
can see it is quite a bit faster than
what you can get if you try to use an
open source engine. Um, and it's not the
systems, it's it's the algorithm. Um so
yeah that's what we want to work towards
understanding both how speculative
decoding works as well as the algorithm
on the right.
Okay. Um I'll start by introducing what
speculative decoding is how it works and
then we'll move into what speculative
speculative decoding is. I hope that if
you have like a reasonably strong
understanding of how speculative
decoding works the the problem that SSD
is trying to solve will feel very
motivated and and the algorithm should
just become clear in good time.
Okay, so this is the schematic I'm going
to use to explain how vanilla
speculative decoding works. Um, it has a
small model, the tiny llama up top, as
well as a big model, the big llama. And
our goal is simply to sample fast from
the big llama. We want tokens generated
from the big model. And we're going to
use a small model as a sort of proxy or
an instrument to be able to sample
quickly from the big model. Okay. So,
what the draft is going to be
responsible for is basically generating
a bunch of tokens one by one. One by one
is important. It's auto reggressive. So
you need to do three forward passes on
the draft or you know however many some
constant number. Um and these are going
to be guesses for what the draft
believes that the big model is going to
output next. It wants to sort of predict
ahead of time. The job that the big
model has, I'm going to call it the
target model, is verifying these
guesses. What does verification mean?
Verification means doing one forward
pass over these generated tokens to see
how likely it is that the big model
would have generated them. The sort of
key asymmetry here, the reason that
speculation works is that it is easier
to verify than to generate. This is a
feature of the transformer architecture
where you can get the probabilities for
many tokens in a sequence in parallel in
one forward pass. Um but you can't
generate them in parallel. auto
reggressive decoding as uh one at a
time. Um so we're leaving the auto
reggressive decoding which is slow uh to
a very quick and small model and then
we're doing just one forward pass on
these tokens. And the way you verify
tokens is basically by having the big
model look at the probabilities of each
of the generated tokens and see how
plausible it is that it would have
generated those tokens. And sort of the
intuition here is that we will accept
precisely those tokens that the big
model could plausibly have generated.
Its probabilities were reasonably high.
There subtleties in exactly what the
algorithm is um that I'm going to gloss
over, but that's the way to think about
it. Um and then we're going to find a
point perhaps where we don't think it's
plausible the big model would have
generated those tokens and we're going
to reject those tokens. So in the little
schematic on the right uh there the
draft samples three and the big model
verifies them and concludes that only
the first token was something it would
plausibly have generated. It will reject
the second token onwards and importantly
this is a sort of critical but subtle
detail of vanilla specular decoding
because you have the probabilities at
each of the sequence positions. You can
sample an extra token at the point at
which you rejected a token for free as
in without doing any more forward
passes. And so that yellow token is what
I'm going to call a bonus token that you
sample for free. This is going to be
important in SSD. Um, so yeah, that's uh
that's an important conceptual point.
And
this sort of sets the stage for how SSD
works. Okay, we have our schematic.
And the way we've set up speculative
decoding is that it's a way to exchange
flops for latency. So speculation in
general is not actually something that
uh only LLMs do. It's like a a deep idea
in computer science. It's used in CPUs
as well where the general philosophy is
that you premputee something ahead of
time. Some of what you premputee may be
useless because it may be an incorrect
prediction of the future, but if you're
right, you get to fast forward in time
um and you get lower latency as a
result. So the the sort of like moral
philosophy of speculative decoding is
that it's currency exchange. The
difficulty with normal speculative
decoding is that you can't push this
arbitrarily far. You cannot keep
sampling more and more tokens on the
draft and keep getting speed ups because
at some point you're going to get to a
point where you're spending a lot of
time drafting and you're not accepting
all that many tokens. And in particular,
like a big bottleneck in vanilla
speculative decoding is the sequential
dependence between the small llama and
the big llama. Um the drafting in round
t has to take place before the
verification of those tokens. um and the
drafting in round t+1 can't take place
before you know the outcome of
verification of the previous round
because you need that as a prefix to
draft on top of. So there's a logical
dependency here. The goal of SSD is very
simple. There's a lot of gnarly and
subtle details but the highle idea is
incredibly simple. It is simply to
parallelize this sequential operation.
We want drafting and verification to be
happening at the same time.
Normally in speculation they happen on
the same hardware and that's fine
because there's only one of them
happening at a time. In our setup
they're going to be happening at the
same time. So we're not going to be
collocating them. And the main question
basically becomes how do you parallelize
this inherently sequential algorithm
that has a logical dependency. Um and
the way we're going to do that is we are
going to have the draft model send back
its draft tokens in a certain round. So
we've sent back a bunch of blue tokens.
That's now the job of the verifier to do
a forward passover and verify. And this
is going to take a while because a
verifier is a big model. What we on the
draft are going to do is basically start
anticipating the most likely
verification outcomes immediately.
As soon as we send back like a certain
round of speculation and once we we have
in mind some of the most likely
verification outcomes, we are going to
start drafting the next round on top of
those immediately while verification is
taking place. If we're right, the next
time the verifier asks for a draft,
we'll have it ready immediately. We're
entirely hiding the latency of drafting.
If we're wrong, well, we'll have to
figure out a backup strategy. And
there's uh there's there's there's some
subtleties on what you do and how you do
it there. Um so yeah, the way that
speculative decoding looks like this.
And perhaps unsurprisingly, the analog
for SSD is this diagram on the right.
We're now drafting and verification
happen in parallel. um the the principal
difficulty or algorithmic design space
in SSD is how do you predict
verification outcomes ahead of time. I
thought verification is where you are
leveraging the intelligence of the big
model that should by construction be
difficult to predict. Um and the
intuition for why it's plausible at all
is that you can make many guesses on the
draft for what a verification outcome
is. And a verification outcome here is
just you know a plausible number of
accepted tokens and then a bonus token
on top of that. Now this is hard to
predict because a bonus token comes from
a vocabulary which has size you know
tens to hundreds of thousands. Um so
it's a large space to cover um but it
turns out you can do it well um
reasonably well. You can get it right
about 80 to 90% of the time which is
more than enough to get big speed ups.
And the way we do that, the short of it
is basically we use information on the
draft to predict what the verification
outcome is likely to be. When we
generated the blue tokens on the draft,
we had other tokens that we chose not to
sample. Those other tokens are plausible
verification bonus token candidates. And
so you basically use information from
the token distributions of the draft
model to predict what likely outcomes on
the target are. And then once you have
all of these predictions, you can decode
them in parallel as just different
sequences that you're decoding on top of
a shared prefix. And voila, it uh it's
it gives you speedups because you get to
hide the latency of drafting altogether.
Um there's also a an additional bonus
that since verification actually kind of
takes a while, you get more time to
draft uh in the first place. So you can
draft more tokens which increases the
expected tokens per round and sort of
gives you further speed ups. There's a
bunch of stuff that we work through in
the paper that's uh that's sort of
reckoning with the the implementation
details of this. One of it is how you
handle cache misses. One plausible thing
you could do perhaps naively is to just
fall back to ordinary speculation just
in time. Turns out that actually this is
not always optimal. Um there's
trade-offs. You know, as batch size
increases, you're going to fail to
predict some of the sequences
verification outcomes. Um and so you
need different ways to predict and
handle cache misses. Should you be
allocating your compute on the draft
equally amongst plausible
prefix length? Uh the short answer is
no. You can be clever about it. And all
of this trickery just helps you increase
your cash hit rate, so to speak, the
amount of time you're able to correctly
predict verification outcomes. And
there's there's some trade-offs between
cash hit rate and the actual quality of
the drafting you're doing. Um and this
is totally non-obvious. Um, and and and
we we go into why that exists and how
you can navigate it in the paper. Um,
I'm happy to talk about it in in in Q&A
as well. Um, okay. So, what do you get
for the the price of this uh
mind-numbing
complexity and uh pain wrangling an
inference engine? Well, you get the
privilege of watching a number go up,
which I guess is the north star of all
AI research. And so here we have uh a
bunch of inference algorithms and
inference engines. The blue ones are
sort of uh my inference engine and uh
the light blue is just the baseline
implementation of speculative decoding.
The red is SG lang which is you know of
all the inference engines we tried the
fastest with speculative decoding and
the dark blue is is SSD. Um and normally
speculative decoding um is a is a win
for latency but it's sort of unclear
whether it's useful for throughput. um
for us it turn in in in this setting
it's actually a win for both um and so
you get numbers going up and you also
get the ability next time you are at a
San Francisco house party um to see
other people dancing and knowing in the
corner that uh you know what it takes to
sample at 300 tokens per second uh for
llama 370B on 4H100s. So this is uh
sensitive information um but yeah that's
that's about it. YOU.
All right, that was awesome. Okay, so
for this next paper,
this is um my first experience being
scooped. The only issue is that he
didn't talk to me and he did it six
months before me. Um
but uh Isaac can vouch for me on this
and maybe Robert as well. I basically
fell in love with the diffusion policy
paper. I was like this is definitely
like you know a full uh predicting like
th horizon steps for your robotic
control. Um we have these amazing video
models. Why don't we just use the video
model to like run this like at test time
to like play out the movie and where do
I end up? And then you have your classic
push t. And then I started like looking
around uh and then DM mind of course
already did it. So
so I wasted like a month and it was not
happy. But anyway, thank you very much.
Please welcome Stannis.
>> Hi everyone. I'm Stannis. I'm a star
research scientist at Google DeepMind.
Uh currently I'm co-leading a new
project on word modeling for robotics.
uh where we try to build general purpose
policies on top of video and word
models. But uh this is an early work
that I did about two years ago. Uh so
this is before I switched to working on
hardcore robotics and uh going into
hardware really scaling up the data but
uh you can probably see a lot of very
similar ideas early version of ideas
demonstrated on toy problems. Okay. So
uh first to give some background what is
the model predictive control. So model
predictive control also called the
receding horizon control uses a dynamics
model or some people also call it a word
model and uh action selector mechanism
uh which is a planner to construct
agents that can solve a wide variety of
tasks by means of maximizing a no
objective. So the main advantages of
model predictive control is uh it can
adapt to normal reward functions at test
time. So uh the dynamics model are also
easier to learn and generates better
than just policies and the action
proposal dynamics model factorization
also allows easy adaptation to normal
dynamics. So we're going to uh
demonstrate some of these in later
experiments but basically here we are
showing the overall idea which is
extremely simple. We have a action
proposal which proposes a sequence of
actions. We have a dynamics model which
can evolve these actions and give you
the future states. And uh finally we
have some objective functions that we
are trying to optimize. We basically use
a planner to optimize that and uh pick
the actions and execute it in the
environment. So what is diffusion model
operative control? So the motivation
mainly is uh uh there are a couple of
problems we need to address in order to
make MPC effective in practice. One the
dynamics model need to be accurate to
avoid the problem of compounding errors
and uh two the planning algorithm also
needs to be powerful enough to select a
good sequence of actions. So with DMPC
what we did is to use diffusion models
to learn both multi-step action
proposals and multi-step uh dynamics
models. So the advantages are mainly to
reduce compounding errors and we also
found that uh it can simplify the
planning algorithm. Essentially we can
just use a very simple uh sampling based
planner and we can already outperform a
lot of the previous uh approaches. So uh
before we dive into the details also
want to give a hierarchical view of some
related works we organized. So there are
a lot of related works in the literature
and uh we organize it uh uh in this way
where we basically look at how different
approaches um so basically all
approaches essentially try to build a
joint uh distribution of the states and
the actions but they do it in different
ways and also use the different
components in different ways. So for
example, you can build it in a
factorized way where you have row a
which is your policy predicting the
actions and then collision on the action
predict the state which is a dynamics
model and uh for this you have the dynam
paradigm where you basically learn a
model and use the model to also generate
data in the imagination and the learn
policy. But uh you can also do MPC uh
where you uh essentially use a planner
to select the actions and uh we also
have uh some uh uh there are also
approaches where you build a joint model
of the state and actions and you're
essentially also doing MPC and there are
also model free approaches where you
directly learn a policy. uh I won't dive
into the full details but uh uh there
are basically different trade-offs in
terms of runtime plan uh whether we can
do runtime planning and uh adapting to
normal rewards and adapting to normal
dynamics leveraging non-expert data and
also the uh general speed at runtime and
there is also the distinction between
whether you're doing singlestep modeling
or multi-step modeling.
Okay. So coming to diffusion model,
diffusion model has enjoyed a lot of
successes uh in uh generating AI
especially for generating images and
videos. But uh in recent years they also
found a lot of successes in robotics. So
currently uh so here I'm also showing a
slide where uh this is a kind of the
exploration space for uh diffusion based
uh I would calling diffusion based
agents. So we of course start with the
diffusion policy where we condition all
the observation and generate future
actions. But then we also have this work
called the diffuser which uh is uh you
can think of it as a way to joint
jointly model uh observations and states
but in toy space. There are of course
these ideas are explored in tons of
different papers but this is just a very
simple and uh uh conceptual way to
describe it. And uh then there's also
decision diffuser where we collision on
the observations we directly generate
future uh we condition on the history
directly generate future observations
and then try a separate inverse dynamics
model to derive the actions and uh
finally we have the diffusion model
predictive control where we first have
an action proposal to propose future
actions and use a dynamics model to
evolve it and uh then use planner to
select the actions. There are different
uh trade-offs among these. So for
example, diffusion policy is sort of on
complex uh complex control like
day-to-day we still rely on it a lot.
But this requires expert demonstrations.
So essentially you can't move out of the
behavior cloning paradigm. Uh for
diffuser it's a jointly modeling state
and action. So it has implicit word
modeling and also model based planning.
And this is actually something that we
are trying to explore at scale similar
ideas. But uh and then there's also uh
decision diffuser where you do
observation only learning. The main
benefit of this is it allows you to
leverage uh uh video only data to learn
from video only data because for
robotics uh the data is a many
bottleneck. And then finally there's a
division MPC which allows us to do
runtime adaptation to normal rewards and
normal dynamics. So what does the
algorithm look like? It actually is
extremely simple. We have uh often data
set and uh we have uh some
hyperparameters. Essentially we are
learning a couple of u uh learning a
couple of models all from the offline
data sets. We're learning a policy which
u uh given the current observation
predicts the actions. We're learning a
dynamics model which uh given the uh
given the actions uh evolves the
observations to predict the future
states. And uh uh basically after
learning all this at uh um at uh
inference time when we actually deploy
it as a policy we uh sampled action
proposal and score it uh rank it and uh
pick the best. But uh the main
difference uh compared to previous
approaches is uh we adopted a multi-step
action proposal which uh is uh
essentially very similar to a diffusion
policy but if you train on more diverse
data it can give you uh more coverage in
terms of the action space and uh we are
also using a multi-step
um uh dynamics model which uh allows you
to uh evolve for a long time horizon
without a lot of compounding error. And
uh this allows us uh to and also uh
there's a fact that we leverage
diffusion model which is a really
powerful way to model data especially
multimodel data and uh uh what we
observed empirically is the uh stronger
modeling uh capabilities also allows us
uh to uh simplify the planning algorithm
so that we can just use such a simple uh
planner to do to solve the task. tasks.
Yeah. Um also contrasting with a few of
the representative uh uh path works uh
including uh model based offline control
offline planning and this diffuser work
which I mentioned it learns a joint
model and uses a classifier free
guidance for planning.
Okay. Uh so yeah next to dive into some
uh results uh there are lots of numbers
but the short answer is uh we obtain
very competitive results in fixed reward
single task setups. This is just to
demonstrate that uh uh the approach uh
when you deploy it in uh single reward
uh fixed reward single task setup it can
perform competitively to the current
state-of-the-art uh previous
state-of-the-art approaches. But uh I
think uh there are a couple of uh more
interesting uh properties of DMPC. One
is it can adapt to no rewards at
runtime. Here we are showing some uh
examples where uh essentially we train
the model to uh these are very simple
modulo tasks but we train the model to
just uh local motion tasks run forward
and jump etc. But uh at inference time
we can just by changing the reward
function to uh make it uh exhibit uh
novel behaviors like uh jumping etc. So
uh here's another example where we show
that uh uh DMPC can adapt to novel
dynamics while uh this kind of uh joint
modeling approaches struggle. This is
really the benefit of the factorization
of the action proposal and the dynamics
model. So the here the idea is uh we can
keep the action proposal the same but uh
we uh we have uh scenarios where the
dynamics of the environment changed. So
for example the walker has a broken left
ankle and as a result when it starts to
execute actions the consequence of the
actions change. So in such cases because
of the factorized representation in DMPC
we can uh simply just adapt the dynamics
model on some play data collected in the
new environment and uh we observe that
we can recover a lot of the performance
because of the changing dynamics.
Finally, we dug into the various
components of uh the DMPC design and we
demonstrated that uh the different
components in DMPC basically contributed
to improved performance. Uh this uh
these include uh the diffusion active
proposals, action proposals, improve
performance and simplify the planning.
We do multi-step diffusion action
proposals and the the fact that we do
multi-step also uh contributes to
improved performance and finally
multi-step dynamics modeling also uh
contributes to improved performance.
Uh that's it.
All right. And that was the last Google
Deep Mind paper that they're going to
publish. So, good luck out there. Um,
this next one is one of my lab mates
that I work with a lot that is the most
world model pled person
that I know.
And so, I can't imagine, you know,
anyone else presenting this paper other
than Yan Lun himself. Um,
Isaac Ward. There you go. Thanks a lot.
>> All right, guys. Is Is that a good
distance? You all can hear me at the
back. Cool. Cool. Yeah, I'm enjoying a
uh a cool little period in life where I
started working on world models a couple
years ago, kind of before they got
really hot and now they're enjoying a
moment in the sun and suddenly everyone
wants to talk to me which is nice. I'm
presenting lay world model which is a
call out of course out of Yan Lacun's
group. Uh QR code here if you want to
follow along with the project page, but
I'll explain through it and yeah, really
excited to talk to you about this one.
Uh hidden in this presentation is really
like a billion-dollar question and it's
not hyperbole. uh Yan Lakun's raise of
$1.03 billion dollars back in March
basically just to train world models is
sort of what this presentation is about.
I want to get at some of the questions
that they're going to be testing. First
five slides here just going to do some
basics on world models. I think we've
all heard the term but I want to just
make sure we're all on the same page and
then we'll jump into uh what this paper
is really uh offering and what it means
for world models at large. But first of
all, world models, what are they? Why do
we care about them? So really it's about
learning the dynamics of the world,
which is to say we're trying to come up
with some model Typically, we're using
like a big neural network to predict how
a system will change over time based on
its inputs. So, you have your current
state or scenario using S for notation
here. You're playing some action, maybe
that's like a movement or a command for
a robot, um, or a language command for a
robot, and then you're trying to predict
like what its outcome is going to be,
like what scenario will it end up in
once it's executed that action. So,
you're really trying to model the system
or the environment that the robot is in,
modeling the world. It's a world model.
Uh, these kinds of models are really
cool. They enable a few really
interesting capabilities. One of them is
generating imagined outcomes. We've
probably all seen like the sort of weird
kind of um hallucinity uh imagination
sequences coming out of world models
over the last couple years. We'll talk
more about those and why they're useful.
Uh this allows us to get to model based
control. I'm glad Stannis kind of
explained that in the last talk for me,
so I'll skip over it. Um and the last
piece is really cool. Surprise
quantification. Uh I'll get to that
later. Um but a really powerful
capability of world models. I wanted to
communicate to you all that this is not
a new idea at all. It's really just kind
of new advertising or packaging on an
old idea. So I started going back
through Google Scholar and this is a
paper that I think is older than the
average age of this room. Um from
Europe's 1990 and of course Richard S.
Sutton who we know from reinforcement
learning basically describes exactly a
modern world model a black box that
takes as input its situation and its
action that it's going to execute and
outputs a prediction of its immediate
next situation. So really really old
idea and uh that's the flyer from
Europe's 1990.
Great. Right. So, getting a little bit
more explicit um and changing the
notation from state to observation just
because in real world systems, we
typically don't have access to the exact
true state. We typically have some
observation from sensors. This is just
an example that I pulled up from some
world models that we're training on a
quadrotor. So, as an example, the
observation that the quadrotor gets
might be its current kinematic state,
position, velocity, this kind of thing.
In addition to the images that it's
taken from a forward- facing camera, the
action might be a control input, in this
case a yaw, and move back to the left.
And then we want to make a prediction
that says well if you do that action
you're going to end up slightly back in
the room and looking to the left. And we
actually want to generate what the
sensor um would result uh in in this
case. So highly uh dimensional
observations images uh and also LAR and
things like that are completely on the
table in world models. Uh they're really
challenging because action sequences can
be quite long. Um and the really big
thing is that the minimum in the
optimization landscape for these kinds
of models may not correspond to the
desired behavior. And more on that
later. Um, but hopefully you'll agree
that if you have trained a system that's
capable of doing this thing, it must
have an internal model of the world. And
imbuing agents with an internal model of
the world, um, is potentially a very
useful capability. And that really is
the big question. Are we going to have
model free or model based policies? Are
our agents going to have an internal
model of the world or are they not? And
this is sort of being fought out right
now both in the research community and
in like the startup community. So on the
left, model free. The idea is you're
taking some observations, you're feeding
this into some kind of big neural
network potentially with a bunch of
interesting learning tricks there, but
you're getting some optimal action out.
So, it's just mapping between
observation and some optimal action. But
at no point is there an explicit
representation of what the future might
look like if you execute that action.
These kinds of models are pretty good.
There is growing evidence to show that
internal to these neural networks are
highly obuscated and challenging to
interpret world models uh sort of in the
in the weights. uh I'll talk about a
paper very briefly that's um speaks to
that and maybe someone can present on it
in a future week. And then over on the
um other side, model based approaches,
right? So now we're saying we're going
to train this world model up explicitly
and actually use that in our policy to
be able to explicitly predict the
outcome of potential actions. So yeah,
totally like two different species of
policies. The model free stuff, some of
the weaknesses is they show a little bit
of brittleleness to out of distribution.
Um, model based ones are great because
you can kind of quantify modeling error
and this is really important when you're
deploying things in the real world. Uh,
we'll talk a little bit about this. I
have a little asterisk here, some
biological precedent which we'll speak
to more. Um, and you have to have this
additional mechanism of course which is
a downside where you actually need to
propose action candidates to evaluate
with the world model um, which Stannis
spoke to in the previous talk. This is a
great paper. But I just wanted to chuck
this in there uh which talks about how
even model free base policies do have
world models in them and a really really
cool paper that hopefully can be
presented in a future week. Uh just to
make it concrete before we jump into the
paper I wanted to just bring a little
toy here just to show you what this
looks like. So of course went to push t
like all good researchers do and in push
t we basically just have an image of a
little blue ball agent and you're trying
to push the blue tea into the green
slot. uh the state is comprised the
observation is comprised of that image
plus the 2D position of the endeector
and the 2D action of where you're going
to move the endector. So you can make a
little architecture that looks like
this. I just whipped this up. Couple
hundred thousand parameters and um oh
let's play this. So if that's the actual
roll out, this is what the model thinks
the action sequence is going to do. So
you can see it's a little bit wobbly
because it's a tiny model, but we can
certainly train up models of these kinds
of toy environments and indeed more
complex ones. So what are the challenges
associated with training this kind of
model? Well, one is you're trying to
learn the representation of the world.
So how you're going to compactly
represent those highly dimensional
images or LAR inputs or highly
dimensional sensor inputs at the same
time as you're trying to learn how
actions change that representation. So
you're co-learning representation and
dynamics. And there are many solutions
in the optimization landscape that will
essentially just cause you to do
nothing. So for example a a local min
minima in the optimization landscape is
to say well every state is just the same
it's a trivial collapse basically um and
there are many techniques in the
literature to say how can you avoid
these so there are solutions of a
variety different kinds that basically
say there a way to avoid the collapse
associated with training world models
and that's really where the world model
comes in. It says, well, instead of
having to use some manner of trick or
like special method or a bunch of like
hyperparameter tuning schedule, we're
instead going to really drastically
simplify this and go for a more elegant
method. So, if you know a little bit
about world models, there's some popular
ones in the top right here. This is a
figure straight out of the paper. So,
PLDM is planning in with latent dynamic
models, dino, dino, um, distillation
with no labels, world model, dreamer out
of deep mind, and then temporal
difference MPC as the final one. So, in
some way, shape or form, I'll explain
this. they use some kind of trick or um
like challenging to configure design to
get away with uh this collapse to avoid
this collapse and the world models
coming in and saying basically we can do
this with sort of one hyperparameter and
one loss term which I'll talk about
there's really no time to go through all
the different tricks that different
world model approaches use because it
really is the wild west out there right
now so many different methods but they
basically fall into one of these three
categories so one is you could do some
explicit heristic that stops collapse by
like enforcing some special um
healthiness in like the latent space of
your embeddings. Um the language trick
is maybe a bit unfair here, but it's
what's used in the paper. Uh you could
use some foundational methods. So you
could take some like existing
autoenccoder or diffusion model or video
model and use that as a basis for your
world model and add an action
conditioning element in there. Um or you
could use some privilege data that may
not be usually available to the model
outside of train time uh to be able to
avoid collapse. and lay well model even
though it says that it's doing something
very different I really think uh it's
just offering a new kind of trick uh
which I'll talk about here so jer is
joint embedding predictive architecture
it's sort of yan lakun's main work and
lay world model is a kind of jepper
model uh basically the way it works is
you're going to take an autoenccoder um
or I should say an image encoder uh
encode this observation in this case
it's of a robot doing a push cube task
that's going to turn that image into a
latent vector in the latent space of
this encoder uh you're going to train an
action condition forecasting module this
predictor to be able to predict what is
the next latent embedding going to look
like when I execute this action. So not
what the next image is going to look
like but what's the next latent going to
look like and you can use the decoder
attached to that encoder to decode that
back out into a useful image. But for
the most part all the interesting work
is going to be done in the latent space.
And basically what they say is over a
batch all of those latent embeddings uh
should be in a healthy distribution
which they describe as a gausian
distributed uh distribution in in the
latent space and thus enters the sigg
regularizer which is the sort of new
term they add. So sigg for sketching as
in uh doing one-dimensional passes over
a high dimensional data. Um I for
isotropic so this should look the same
when you slice it in any direction and g
for gaus and distributed cigar. So
basically you're taking all of these
embeddings of your different predictions
doing a one-dimensional slice over each
direction like in that highdimensional
space and then you want each of the
curves across those slices to be gausian
distributed and if that's true then your
um distribution in the latent space must
be very healthy. Uh so the idea is you
can quite cheaply evaluate how gausian
distributed your embeddings are and thus
how healthy your world model is and how
non-olapsing it is. So essentially I
just say instead of training up on the
normal predict the next uh latent you
add on this additional sigg term. So I'd
argue that basically this paper is just
um providing a very elegant kind of
regularization. And to finish off I'll
just talk about three capabilities that
you get from this. So one is the
openloop prediction quality. This is
what world models do. So you feed in
like the context this push t at the top
and you can see the top row is the real
example. The bottom is the imagined and
they look about the same. This is good.
It means your world model is really good
at predicting what your next action is
going to do. They do that on push t and
then on a slightly um like a 3D analog
task like a push cube. This is all
great. I love seeing these um these
plots. Um but really what matters is how
does this actually affect the policy
like for the actual task completion. How
is this useful? Um and that sort of
brings us into how you can use these
models for model predictive control.
Basically you take your initial
observation and a goal observation. I
put an asterisk there because how often
do you have a goal observation in a
robotics task? Like you don't always
know exactly the situation that you want
to end up in. But in this case, that's
how they frame it. So they say, you
know, the world looks like this right
now. I want the world to look like this.
You encode both of those. And then
you're basically doing a search over the
actions that will get you in the latent
space from this starting point to this
ending point. And there are well-
definfined optimization methods to um to
achieve that. It works pretty well. I'll
make it um make it simple. The world
model is better than the competition on
these like small 2D tasks. As soon as
you go to 3D, Dino World model wins. It
does have a big foundational backbone
trained on that kind of image data. So
you'd expect it to um to win. Um they
run on a really simple environment
called two room and kind of say you know
we don't do so well on this but that's
because we're promoting like really high
dimensional healthy embeddings and it's
a very low dimensional problem. I'm not
sure if I'd truly go for that. Um but a
good takeway is that it's about 50 times
faster than any of the competition
across the board because it's doing all
this work in the latent space and it
doesn't have to have any like additional
tricks relating to more forward passes
or like having two copies of the model
in memory. And uh you can actually boot
this thing up on like a single card,
less than 24 gigabytes of VRAM and it's
only 15 million parameters. So that is
pretty nice. Final piece, this is what I
think is a really cool capability of
world models. Um you can quantify the
model error. So basically they just come
up with some trajectories that kind of
screw with the world model. So the top
one is going from left to right. That's
time. Uh so that's just like a nominal
example. Everything's normal. Then they
take the same example, but they change
the color of the tea. And then they take
the same example, but they just teleport
the tea into a different location. And
this is really cool because you can
actually see the moment they apply those
perturbations, you get a spike in the
model error and this is detectable which
is to say world model enabled agents can
quantify how poor their predictions are.
They have good estimates of their
uncertainty. This is really powerful.
Model freebased approaches don't
natively give you this stuff.
This is my last slide. Um a few
discussion points and broader themes
maybe we can chat about here. Obviously,
you know, are we going to go with model
based? Are we going to go with model
free? Um what's going to be the best way
to enable intelligent agents to do
interesting things in the world?
regularization and representation
learning. Um, in this paper they are
co-learning the representation of the
world that the agent has and the
dynamics of the world. Should this be
separated? Can we take some bio
inspiration? Should we use pre-existing
um like foundation models and stuff like
that? And then finally, how can we fight
uh representational collapse elegantly?
I think this work does a really great
job of that, but the question is still
out on what the best way to do it is. So
um that's my talk. Thanks very much for
your attention.
All right.
Okay.
So, for the next two,
um, we're kind of focusing on, um, less
world model stuff and more heady, high
level stuff that I think is pretty
interesting. Um, this is a a paper
that's going to be presented by Ashe,
one of the YC uh, startups here named
QABs. and your co-founder president.
You're president of QABs. Is that right?
>> Okay. Welcome Ashe.
>> Hey everybody. Today I'm going to be
talking through Andrew Gordon Wilson's
paper uh deep learning is not so
mysterious or different. Uh we actually
work with Andrew on the generalization
problem at Q Labs. So I'm really excited
for more people to know about his work.
The current state of machine learning is
that we know that scaling that scaling
models leads to better generalization.
But we don't have a mechanistic
understanding of why that is the case.
Um yeah, if we can understand general
generalization, then we might be able to
optimize for it as well. So the payoff
to understanding it is actually really
really large. Um when you talk to people
in the field, they often explain that
generalization is a mystery and they
point to examples like
overparameterization,
benign overfitting and and double
descent as reasons why we might not be
able to understand generalization at
all. So Andrew's work here basically
dispels those mysteries by using
classical theories of generalization uh
which which have to date not really been
used to explain things like like
overparameterization thus far. So the
first classical theory that we'll go
through is uh pack bay. So pack bay
basically bounds the test loss which is
the generalization. This is the quantity
that we care about with a training loss
and a compression term. Um the thing is
in the past when people overparameterize
models this compression term tends to
dominate and so in practice these bounds
become loose and vacuous meaning that we
can't use them for anything at all. This
was basically due to a mislication of
the bound. You can compute the the
compression term in an alternative way
as we'll get into sort of later in the
talk here. So let's go through the first
mystery that uh Andrew goes through in
his paper. Um the the mystery that he
talks about is overparameterization. And
this is basically the idea that as you
scale up the the model parameter size
from the bias various variance
trade-off, you would expect that you
might overfit. But in practice, we see
the opposite. The scaling laws tell us
that we actually get better
generalization. Um the the the scaling
and the better generalization from
overparameterization is is is due to
like the the the massive gains in model
capability over the last couple of
years. But we still don't really
understand why it impro why it improves
generalization.
So the packbased framework gives us a
pretty useful way to think about the
success of over par parameterization.
The first is with empirical risk.
Empirical risk is basically training
loss. When you increase the number of
parameters you can fit your data better.
Um so the empirical risk the left uh the
first term goes down.
And Andrew's work also finds that when
we increase the model, when we increase
the number of parameters, um we also
find more compressible solutions. So
this is work by Lotfi at all at all and
they develop methods to basically
compress the uh yeah they compress the
the training set you and and and the
model and they basically find a negative
correlation between the the bits
required to encode the training set and
the number of parameters. Um and so we
find that as we increase the model size
we can find more efficient encodings of
the training set. So the the second term
in this bound also gets lower.
Another perspective on this model
compressibility point is a perspective
of flatness. As you increase the number
of parameters, it turns out that the
number of the volume of flat minima in
parameter space exponentially increases.
This is the green region and uh and
comparatively the the volume of sharp
minima increases much less and uh this
is interesting and this is useful the
compressibility view because flat minima
are known to be more compressible than
sharp minima and so overparameterization
fits within existing theories and
through Andrew's work we actually see
useful bounds on generalization even for
models at at like a billion parameter
scale and so we go to the next so-called
mystery of deep learning which is called
uh benign overfitting which Andrew also
dispels in or at least partially
explains in his paper. So the idea of
benign overfitting is that deep neural
networks are able to fit totally random
noise but at the same time they are able
to to to generalize well when you have
structured data. The mystery is how can
you have an inductive bias that allows
you to generalize well if you can also
fit totally random data. I think a
regularized polomial model um in
Andrew's paper gives us pretty good
intuition for how this might be the
case. Here you can see that on random
data, so section C of the figure that we
have enough parameters to fit the data
and so we we can we can fit the totally
random data. But on structured data, the
the regularization pushes us to use the
lower order terms. And so we are able to
both get the flexibility but also have
inductive bias that allows us to
generalize. And generally this is this
is the view to take um for for neural
networks like there are expressive
models with a soft inductive bias. Um we
can go through this concept um just
using this figure right here. So uh on
the left hand side we have an example of
of what's like a flexible hypothesis
space. And a flexible hypothesis space
would allow you to fit the data that you
have. But the problem is that you would
almost certainly overfit if you if you
um if you do not have a bias towards one
solution over the other. But on the
other hand, if you have an inductive
bias, you would solve this overfitting
problem, but instead you wouldn't you
wouldn't be able to model all of the
details of reality. Um and so the middle
ground is to have a very expressive
hypothesis space, but also have a bias
towards solutions that might generalize.
For example, in the pack bay framework,
we might want to bias towards more
compressible models if we can. And so we
see that uh deep learning so-called
mysteries are actually consistent and
partially explained by existing theories
such as soft inductive biases and pack
bays.
And sort of the thing I want to leave
you with is that um if if we can find
the right inductive biases building on
these theories, we might be able to
optimize for them as well. And by the no
free lunch theorem, the only way that we
get improvements in learning efficiency
is through inductive biases. So I I
think that this is that working on this
problem is is a really good bet to make.
Given the massive sample efficiency gap
between AI and humans, we might actually
see massive gains in capability. If we
work on this problem um and so yeah,
that's where I want to leave you with
short presentation.
Okay. Um so for this last paper then
after this we have some boba for
everyone. So sit tight 15 minutes. Um
this is an idea that you know I've been
obsessed with. Back to the sample
efficiency thing. I think that like the
two major problems we have left really
to solve in in AI is intelligence per
watt um and intelligence per sample. And
if you compare that to to where we're at
today compared to humans, um I would say
that we're still or an order or two
magnitude off on intelligence per watt.
Uh and we're me like orders of magnitude
off on intelligence per sample. I don't
know what percent of the internet that
you guys have read, but I have not read
the entire internet. In Chris Ray's lab
in particular, we've been obsessed with
this idea that um if I have uh under the
the a fixed size amount of data and I
have infinite compute, just go nuts, how
much generalization can I actually
achieve? And so this is exactly uh the
paper that starts to answer that
question. And I'm really excited to uh
introduce uh Con Woo.
>> Uh hi, I'm Ku. Um this is a paper that I
co-led with my amazing collaborator
Suhas as well as Percy and Potsu.
So part of the motivation for this paper
is just the fact that over the past uh
six or seven years pre-training has
continued to improve model capabilities
in pretty surprising ways. So in 2020
with GPT3 we had sort of the emergence
of incontext learning. In 2022 with
Anthropics RHF, we had sort of the
advent of alignment. And maybe most
notably in 2024 with both 01 from OpenAI
and then later Deepseek R1, we had the
emergence of reasoning. And in fact,
even still today, we see that with these
newer and bigger pre-training runs like
Mythos and 5.5, the models just continue
to keep better. And so because
pre-training is very expensive, a lot of
the focus on the research side of things
has been on how do we improve compute
efficiency. And in general, people have
found that to improve compute
efficiency, you need to scale both the
number of parameters in your model and
the number of data points that you train
your model on. And so these were
quantified with the so-called chinchilla
scaling laws. The problem with compute
efficiency is that we're soon going to
be constrained by data. And so if you
look at these sort of public projections
of the rate of growth of internet data,
they suggest that the amount of sort of
human generated text on the internet
grows by roughly 3% per year. And the
amount of compute that we're spending on
pre-training is growing by roughly four
or 5x per year. And so what this
suggests is that as time passes on, the
amount of compute that we're willing to
spend per data point is going to
continue to increase by roughly 4x
year-over-year. And so this sort of
motivates the core question in this
paper which is how should you approach
pre-training when you're constrained by
data but totally unconstrained by
compute. And it's worth maybe spending a
few seconds to think for yourself if you
haven't already seen this paper like
what would you do in this situation.
This is a very different algorithmic
regime from sort of the computer
efficient pre-training world that we've
sort of lived in for sort of most of uh
uh modern time. And it's also worth
noting that this question is not that
different from how machine learning
worked before the modern alm. So for
things like classical statistics where
maybe you really care about your rates
with respect to the number of points of
data you have and you don't care about
compute or even older benchmarks like
emnest and pen treebank where you're
sort of implicitly data constrained
because the benchmarks don't have that
many data points.
And so sort of the core contribution
that I'll explain in this paper is that
we bring the modern toolkit of scaling
laws to to sort of answer this problem.
And so what we'll show is that we'll
propose a few different scaling recipes
and we'll sort of chase scaling recipes
that monotonically decrease your iid
validation laws. So sort of in
distribution generalization and we'll
show that these scaling laws have a
really clean functional form and they
follow a super clean power law. And when
you're able to fit these power laws,
what you can do is you can estimate the
best possible loss of your recipe by
looking at the asmtote of the power law.
And this is in some sense a
quantification of your best possible
performance under infinite compute. And
our goal in this paper is sort of to
think more carefully about what types of
algorithms allow you to lower your
compute asmtote. Uh and we're sort of
going to chase these types of infinite
compute wins. And so to start, I'm going
to introduce this canonical setting that
we referenced in this paper, which is
that we're going to simulate a data
constrained world by just constraining
the number of pre-training tokens we
have to be a very small amount. So we're
going to assume access to only 200
million tokens from DCLM, which is
general web data. And what we're going
to do is we're going to pre-train large
and larger models, which is the x-axis,
using different kinds of pre-training
recipes. And the y-axis here is going to
be again our ID validation loss on DS
DCLM. And our goal is going to be to
find recipes that allow us to spend more
compute and train larger models while
monotonically decreasing our loss. So to
start, we can consider sort of the
obvious approach that you might take
when you're in this setting, which is
first to epoch your data. So to train on
the same data points over and over again
until you start overfitting as well as
scaling up your model. So making your
model larger and larger. And what we can
do is we can do both of these at the
same time. And we can do sort of an
exhausted grid search over these
parameters until we start over until we
start overfitting and then we do early
stopping. And this is sort of the red
line which is what we call the standard
recipe. And what you'll see with the
standard recipe is that even if you are
willing to spend more compute, as you
train more and more overparameterized
models, you start to overfit more
quickly and your loss starts to increase
after a certain point.
And so if you see this line, sort of the
natural instinct you should have is how
do we fix this? And one possible
approach is to do really aggressive
regularization. And so sort of the first
baseline in this paper is going to be
doing really aggressive regularization
by cranking up your weight decay. And so
what we do is we show that if you
optimally tune your weight decay for
each total parameter count. So we're
going to optimally tune learning rate,
weight decay, and epoch count for each
one of these purple points. You can show
that your loss follows a really clean
power law as you increase the number of
parameters in your model. And this is
really aggressive regularization. So for
context, we use weight decays that are
something like 30 times larger than the
weight decays that people do for compute
optimal pre-training.
And so on the legend here, you can see
the the sort of the form of this power
law. And it has a few nice properties.
One is that the exponent on the model
parameters n is one. And this is
actually predicted by sort of the data
constraint theory. The second nice
property that it has is that the scaling
law has an asmtote which is 3.43 in this
case. And this characterizes the
performance of the best possible
regularized model in this setting if you
had like infinite compute. So you'll
notice that the baseline approaches
because they overfit more quickly. They
don't even have a measurable asmtote.
And so once we start going down the
rabbit hole of regularization and these
other types of classical machine
learning techniques, there's a whole
basket of techniques to to get into. And
so perhaps maybe the most famous one is
to do ensembling.
And so what we show in this paper is
that you can bring back ensembling in
the modern world of pre-training
language models and they turn out to be
incredibly data efficient. So what these
light blue points correspond to is they
correspond to 300 million parameter
models that were ensembling with more
and more members. So the fifth point
will correspond to 1.5 total billion
total parameters which is five five
ensemble of 300 million parameter
models. We show that you can also fit
really clean scaling laws to ensembles.
So you also get a power law that has
exponent one and the number of ensemble
members and it also has an asmtote. But
most importantly the asmtote of
ensembling is much lower than the
asmtote of the regularized recipe. So
it's giving you a true data efficiency
win if you had an infinite amount of
compute. There's also this interesting
property which is that ensemblings if
you do a compute matched comparison so
the same number of parameters are
actually better than the regularized
recipe. So if your goal is just to train
the best 1.5 billion parameter model
it's better to train an ensemble of a
bunch of small models when you're data
constrained than to train one really
large model. The last thing we show in
this plot is that you can actually
compose the benefits of regularization
and ensembling. So one way to think
about this is that regularization gives
you this ability to continue to make the
models larger and larger while
ensembling introduces this new axis for
scaling compute which is by training
more and more models. And so what this
gold line which we call the joint
scaling recipe is we quantify this
hypothetical performance if we were able
to train an ensemble an infinitely large
ensemble of infinitely large models. And
so the way in which we actually quantify
this performance is we fit two scaling
laws. So we'll take a double limit. What
we'll first do is we'll train ensembles
of 150 million parameter models, 300
million parameter models and so on and
so forth. And then we'll look at the
asmmptotes of the ensembles. And then
we'll take a second we'll fit a second
scaling law to the asmmptotes of these
ensembles. And this is essentially
taking the first limit is taking the
limit over K. And the second limit is
taking the limit over n. And what we
find is that if you're willing to sort
of go through the effort of training
infinitely large models and infinitely
many ensembles, uh you get a huge loss
improvement. And so all of these
experiments are sort of in this toy data
constrained setup of 200 million tokens.
And obviously this is very different
from sort of the standard regime of
pre-training. So what we also do in this
paper is we spend some effort on trying
to confirm that our recipes scale. So
the first way in which we do this is
that we build data scaling laws. So what
data scaling laws are is that we repeat
the exact same set of experiments from
the previous slide at four different
pre-training token counts up to 1.7
billion uh tokens. And so for each slice
on the x-axis at each seat token count,
we're going to quantify the best
possible performance of each recipe if
we had an infinite amount of compute. So
for the red points, they overfit more
quickly. So these will be actual models.
While for the purple and the gold
points, these will correspond to sort of
a single limit or a double limit. What
these data scaling laws let us do is
they let us quantify the data efficiency
numbers of our approaches. So one way in
which we do this is if we have some new
recipe that we believe should improve
upon the standard recipe that we're
using right now, you can take the loss
of your new recipe and you can project
it onto the data scaling law. So the red
line of a standard recipe and this
projection lets you measure essentially
the effective number of extra tokens
that your algorith algorithmic
improvement is buying you. So in this
case what we see is that this joint
scaling recipe gives you roughly a 5x
data efficiency win over uh the the
standard recipe. It's also worth noting
that uh these data efficiency wins are
something that we can realize with sort
of finite models not just double limits.
So for example if you're willing to
train a five ensemble of 1 billion
parameter models this will give you
roughly a 3.7x data efficiency win. The
other interesting aspect about these
data scaling laws is if you look at the
functional form in the legend, you'll
see that they all have really similar
exponents and they all have very similar
asmtotes. And so the reason why this
matters is this suggests that even if
you repeated these experiments at a much
much larger token scale, if you believe
that these data scaling law laws
extrapolate, this data efficiency win is
going to be constant over the actual
number of token counts that you have. So
they suggest that this double joint
scaling well recipe has a 5x data
efficiency win even if you are willing
to send the seed token count to like 10
trillion tokens or whatever people are
doing pre-training at these days. So now
I'll go over some methods to sort of
make this data efficiency win perhaps
slightly more practical. And so even
though these recipes require a lot of
training compute we also show that you
can reduce the amount of inference
compute you need by using distillation.
So the plot on the right here, the
purple line corresponds to the same
regularized recipe. The light blue
points correspond to the same ensemble
skilling. So we first show that what you
can do is you can take an eight ensemble
which is roughly 2.4 billion total
parameters and you can distill it into a
single dense 300 million parameter model
which is the pink star in the bottom.
And you can do this while retaining
roughly 83% of the loss improvement. So
this shows you that data efficiency is
not something that you need a large
amount of inference compute for. If
you're willing to amort amortize the
test time compute during training time,
you can get an extremely data efficient
model that's still very very small. The
other surprising result we show in this
section is that you can do
self-distillation to even improve your
loss. So with self-distillation, what
we're doing is we're starting with the
300 million parameter model at the start
of the light blue curve and then we're
distilling this model into a fresh 300
million parameter model which is the
green star. And what we find is very
surprisingly even doing self
distillation gives you huge loss
improvement. It even beats the asmtote
of the regularized recipe. This is
actually pretty counterintuitive and we
have a longer sort of uh description of
this result in the paper but it turns
out to have pretty surprising
connections to uh ensembling and there's
actually a view uh from prior work on
viewing self-distillation as implicitly
training a two ensemble. We also show
that even though we're only chasing IID
VAT loss in all of our experiments,
pretty much all of the trends in this
paper directly work on downstream
benchmarks. And this is like a fully
held out sort of test set where we only
looked at the benchmarks at the very end
of the paper because the advisers told
us to. Um, and you can see that
everything tracks the standard recipe
overfits. Still model scaling gives you
improvements. Ensembling is even better.
and you can still retain a lot of the
benefits through distillation. And
finally, we also show that you can do
this for other settings beyond
pre-training. So things like continued
pre-training. So we consider a setup
where you're trying to CPT a 3B model
and we assume access to sort of this
restricted set of 4 billion math related
tokens where the whole corpus of data is
actually 73 billion tokens. And what we
show is that if you're willing to do
these data efficiency tricks like
aggressive epoing and things like
ensembling, you can match the
performance of training on the full 73
billion tokens even using only 4 billion
tokens which is roughly a 17x data
efficiency win. So to sort of wrap up
this talk, maybe the main point I want
to make is that when you're constrained
by data and you're unconstrained by
compute and this sort of new algorithmic
regime, the types of algorithmic choices
you make matter a lot and we should be
willing to sort of rethink every aspect
of a stack. In this paper, we mostly do
this by revisiting a lot of these
classical ideas from uh machine learning
and deep learning. Things like
regularization, ensembling, distillation
have existed for for many many years.
And we also introduced this evaluative
tool of asmmptotes. And maybe the hope
is that if you're willing to chase
algorithms that have lower compute
asmmptotes, uh these will give you like
better ideas for data efficiency. But
like ultimately what we really want to
do is we want these asmtotes to help us
develop new and better ideas under
infinite compute that that don't already
exist. And so if you're interested in
the details, that's a QR code for the
paper. And we've also done some
follow-up work on looking at how
synthetic data interacts with data
efficiency. So feel free to check that
out as well if you're interested.
Thanks.
>> All right. Thank you guys so much for
coming. This is like a dream come true.
I'm in one of my favorite places that um
was most important places of my life and
now I get to talk about AI here. So
super super fun. I think there's a lot
of potential for this club. I think I
don't have nearly, you know, 1% of all
the ideas that we probably have to make
this club really great um in all of your
heads. And so we want to make sure all
of you guys get in on the Slack. So I'll
make sure that you know, please send me
a note if you're not already on there.
And then we can kind of make this thing
whatever we want. So it's kind of fun
and I intend to. So like please come
with ideas. We want to make this super
fun. Um obviously, you know, there's
some round rules, be respectful, all
that kind of stuff. Um, and definitely
be involved. And that's kind of the the
the biggest thing that we really only
really ask. That's all I got. That's a
wrap. Go get some boba tea. Thank you.